\chapter{Theoretical Grounding}\label{research}

This chapter will introduce the research done prior to the design. It
will present a short history of \glspl{ide} and list typical \gls{ui}
design patterns in \glspl{ide}. Finally, the principle of \emph{scope}
in programming languages will be explained.

\section{History and Purpose of Integrated Development
Environments}\label{history-and-purpose-of-integrated-development-environments}

\begin{quote}
„A programming environment is a user interface for understanding a
program.“ — Bret Victor \citeyear{victor}
\end{quote}

Software development environments have been predecessed by general text
editors, starting with several projects at the Xerox \gls{parc}. Douglas
Engelbart created the text editor for the NLS system (oNLine System)
which allowed \gls{wysiwyg} style editing. In the \emph{Gypsy} text
editor, Larry Tesler first integrated modeless moving of text, which is
known as \emph{Copy \& Paste} \cite{moggridge}. Text editors with those
functionalities are now the core of any software development
environment.

Later, while working with Alan Kay, Tesler created the first class
browser for the Smalltalk programming language. Class browsers are used
to look at programs not as of textual source code, but as of logical
entities of a programming language (for example classes and methods).
The Smalltalk class browser was therefore the first software
specifically written for creating software, and a predecessor to any
modern development environment.

\emph{Integrated Development Environments} integrate text editors (due
to their specific purpose also referred to here as \emph{code editors})
with other software development tools. Typically, those tools include
compilers, build systems, syntax highlighters, autocompletion,
debuggers, and symbol browsers. The first \ac{ide} is said to be
\emph{Maestro I} by Softlab, a whole terminal dedicated to integrating
various development tasks \cite{maestro}.

\subsection{IDEs compared to Text
Editors}\label{ides-compared-to-text-editors}

It is difficult to delimit the term „\acl{ide}“ and contrast it with
text editor that are mainly used for programming. \citename{reynolds}
formulates a basic definition:

\begin{quote}
„What the different is between a text editor and an IDE – to me at least
– is that an IDE understands the language, whereas the text editor
understands text.“ \citeyear{reynolds}
\end{quote}

In his article, \citename{reynolds} tries to make a point against the
use of text editors for programming by stating that an IDE brings
„forward an understanding of the underlying language and the structure
of code, and puts it front-and-centre in your working environment.“
\citeyear{reynolds} While certainly being correct with this point, he
ignores situations where the „understanding of the underlying language
and the structure of code“ is either not
wanted\footnote{For example, because it may collide with other features that have a higher priority for the respective developer.}
or not possible to achieve.

The latter is often the case in web front-end development, according to
\citeasnoun{lynch}. Through working with lots of different file types
and programming languages, neither of which dictates a certain structure
(in opposition to many static languages like Java), the understanding an
IDE can have about the structure of the code is limited.
\citename{lynch} also states that IDEs „tend to be built with a workflow
in mind“, therefore being seen as opinionated.

In other words, IDEs and text editors seem to follow different,
contradirectional approaches. While the latter is built around a central
paradigm (text editing) and usually comes with a minimal program core
that is extendable to personal likes, IDEs tend to offer everything „out
of the box“ as a one-stop solution.

For this thesis, the distinction only plays a subordinate role, as most
of the concepts and ideas discussed here can be applied to both kinds of
software. However, it is important to clarify that both are adressed
when using, interchangably, any of the following terms: \emph{Integrated
Development Environment (IDE)}, \emph{development environment},
\emph{software development environment}, \emph{programming environment}.

\section{UI and Interaction Patterns in
IDEs}\label{ui-and-interaction-patterns-in-ides}

Many \acl{ui} patterns found in \glspl{ide} are general, well-known
\ac{ui} patterns adapted to a specific purpose. This section gives an
overview on interaction patterns in IDEs that are relevant to this
thesis.

\subsection{User Interface Patterns}\label{user-interface-patterns}

\begin{description}
\item[Code Editor]
Central to every \gls{ide}, a code editor is a specialized text editor,
used for reading and writing program code. It typically features a
\emph{gutter} (see below) and \gls{syntaxhighlighting}. In opposition to
the text editor of a word processor, code editors are not rich text
editors. They also display a monospaced font, which allows to see the
editor content as a grid of rows and columns. With evenly-spaced
columns, due to the monospaced font, code formatting and line
indentation\footnote{In many programming languages, line indentation is an important concept, either as a core syntactical concept or for the sake of readability.}
is made consistent.
\item[Gutter]
The gutter is part of the code editor and describes the narrow space
next to the actual code (usually to the left). Gutters are mainly used
to display line numbers (important for navigation and debugging), but
some provide more advanced features, for example setting
breakpoints\footnote{A feature of the debugger; when set, the program stops at the specified line to allow step-by-step investigation.},
indicating errors in the code through symbols, showing version control
information, or allowing to fold code away in order to either focus or
get an overview.
\item[Panel (sidebar)]
A panel is rectangular \ac{ui} area used to group together interface
element of similar functionality or other commonalities together. Often,
panels are used on the edges of application windows; if they are on the
left or right side, they may be called \emph{sidebar}. Panels that host
a great number of program functionalities are often called
\emph{toolbar}. Some applications implement \emph{dockable} panels,
which can be moved around and snapped to different areas on the screen.
Another common characteristic is that panels can be resized and
\emph{toggled}, i.e. shown and hidden, on demand.
\item[Status bar]
The status bar is known from many programs, for example web browsers and
word processors. It is a small bar (about one text line of height) at
the bottom of the program window, usually spanning the whole window
width. It is mainly used to display status information and quickly
switch between different application modes (for example „insert“ and
„overwrite“ in word processors).
\end{description}

\subsection{Interactional patterns}\label{interactional-patterns}

\begin{description}
\item[Navigation]
Usually, code can be both browsed and searched for from different
perspectives.

For browsing, most IDEs have a built-in file browser. IDEs that have the
respective understanding of code structure can also offer a more
\emph{logical} way of navigating, for examply by symbolic entities like
modules, classes and methods. Those are usually listed in a symbol
browser or class browser. In the Eclipse IDE, the file browser and
symbol browser are combined into one component, called the \emph{project
explorer}.

IDE facilities for searching work analoguously. Files within a project
can be searched for by their name or their content. If the IDE knows
about the symbols of a programming language, those can usually be
searched for as well. Additionally, some IDEs like Eclipse allow the
user to right click on a method call and jump to its definition source
file, if available.
\item[Modes]
In most IDEs, \ac{ui} elements can be shown or hidden, sometimes even
positioned anywhere on the screen. The Eclipse IDE even allows the
creation of completely different \ac{ui} configurations, so-called
\emph{perspectives}. Usually, perspectives are build for a certain task,
e.g. developing or debugging. Text editors like Sublime Text and
Atom\footnote{In Atom, this has to be installed through a package: \url{https://atom.io/packages/zen}}
support a so-called \emph{distraction-free mode}, in which all \acl{ui}
elements are hidden except the editor itself.
\item[Input]
todo
\item[Execution and Debugging]
todo
\end{description}

\section{Relevant programming
concepts}\label{relevant-programming-concepts}

The following section presents concepts of programming and programming
languages that are important to the topic of this thesis. Whereas most
of the concepts apply to a wide range of programming languages,
\emph{JavaScript} was chosen as an exemplary language both to explain
the concepts as well as the target language of prototyping as described
in the next chapter. The reasons for this choice are the author’s
familiarity with the language, as well as the fact that is one of the
most ubiquituous languages used due to its role in the world wide web
and its implementation in web browsers, respectively.

\subsection{Program lifecycle and
debugging}\label{program-lifecycle-and-debugging}

The lifecycle of a computer program consists of different phases, some
of which are addressed in this section.

\begin{description}
\item[Author-time]
shall be the phase during which a program is written, read, understood,
and edited. There is no canonical definition or common name for this
class of activities around source code, which is we define \emph{author
time} as the time separate from run time in which a program author (e.g.
a developer) deals directly with its code.
\item[Compile-time]
is the phase in which program code is translated (compiled) into native
machine code or an intermediate representation (e.g. Java Bytecode in
the case of the \ac{jvm}). This process generally consists of lexical
analysis, parsing and code generation.
\item[Run-time]
is the phase during which a program is executed. In some interpreted
languages, \ac{jit} compilation\footnote{Just-in-Time compilation is the
  compilation of code immediately before its execution, instead of
  during a preliminary compilation phase.} leads to a convergence of
compile time and run time, which makes the distinction harder. \emph{Run
time errors} are errors happening
\item[Debugging]
is the process of identifying and eliminating software errors, so-called
\emph{bugs}. This activity is usually supported by a specialized
software called a \emph{debugger}. The debugger allows to hook into a
program during run-time through so-called \emph{breakpoints} and step
through each statement individually. At all times, the debugger can
expose the values of variables in the respective context.
\end{description}

This thesis adresses mainly the author-time phase - not debugging

\subsection{Identifiers, Variables and
Functions}\label{identifiers-variables-and-functions}

Most programming languages allow to manage their \emph{state}. This is
done using so-called \emph{variables}.

Functions are\ldots{}

Identifiers are the symbolic names given to variables, which are used to
access (read and modify) their contents. In JavaScript, functions can be
treated as variables as well.

\subsection{Scope \& Context}\label{scope-context}

In computer programming, data are usually addressed through identifiers,
for example variables. At some point in the program, a variable is
\emph{declared}, i.e. its existence is made known to the program.

However, in most programming languages, a variable declaration in some
part of the program does not necessarily make the variable accessible
from all other parts of the program. The area in which the variable is
accessible is called its \emph{scope}.

\footnote{This definition of scope is called \emph{lexical scope}. The
  complementing concept, \emph{dynamic scope}, makes variable look-up
  depending on}

In different parts of a program, a variable name can refer to a
different entity, i.e. different data. According to \citeasnoun{getify},
\emph{scope} is „the set of rules that determines where and how a
variable (identifier) can be looked-up“ and therefore be accessed and
used.

The characteristics of „where“ and „how“ depend on the respective
programming language. Most modern languages implement \emph{lexical
scope}, which means that the „where“ depends on the position of the
variable’s declaration in the actual source code. In other words, where
in the source text a variable is declared defines also where it is
usable and accessible.

In contrast, in languages that implement \emph{dynamic scope}

\subsubsection{Nested scope \& variable
lookup}\label{nested-scope-variable-lookup}

Scope is a hierarchical concept: in many programming languages, scope
can be nested by creating a scope \emph{within} another scope. This fact
implies the following definitions which are used throughout this
document:

\begin{description}
\item[Child scope]
A scope \texttt{b} created immediately within another scope \texttt{a}
is a child scope to the \texttt{a}.
\item[Descendant scope]
Any scope nested inside of a scope \texttt{a} is descendant to scope
\texttt{a}.
\item[Parent scope]
The scope in which an immediate child scope is created is its parent
scope.
\item[Ancestor scope]
If scope \texttt{b} is a descendant to scope \texttt{a}, \texttt{a} is
an ancestor of scope \texttt{b}.
\end{description}

In JavaScript, scope nesting is an important concept for variable
lookup. When the JavaScript engine encounters an identifier, it looks
for this identifiers in the scope chain. For example, if a variable is
used in a scope \texttt{a}, the JavaScript engine first looks for its
declaration in the immediate scope, \texttt{a}. However, if it cannot be
found in the immediate scope, the next outer scope (the parent scope of
\texttt{a}) is consulted, continuing the hierarchy of ancestors up until
to outermost (global) scope has been reached. In other words: A variable
is valid in the scope it was created, as well as in all nested
(descendant) scopes. This circumstance leads to the phenomenon of
shadowing, which is described in section
\fullref{common-scoping-problems}. As this way of looking up variables
is executed \emph{each time a variable is encountered}, it can have
impacts on the performance is well, especially if the encountered
variable is defined in a scope way higher in the scope chain.

Nested scope can best be illustrated by the following figure:

\begin{figure}[htbp]
\centering
\includegraphics{fig2.png}
\caption{Nested scope \cite{getify}}
\end{figure}

The function \texttt{foo} is defined \emph{in} the global scope (1) (see
next section), and is therefore accessible from all parts of this
program. \texttt{foo} itself defines a new scope (2) which includes the
identifiers \texttt{a}, \texttt{b} and \texttt{bar}. \texttt{bar}
defines a new scope (3) within \texttt{foo}, defining only the
identifier \texttt{c}. As can be seen, the innermost scope (3) has
access to its own identifiers, as well as to the ones defined in its
containing scope (2).

\begin{quote}
Just as a block or function is nested inside another block or function,
scopes are nested inside other scopes. So,
\end{quote}

\subsubsection{Levels of scope}\label{levels-of-scope}

As mentioned above, the rules for when a new scope is defined differ
depending on the programming language. Usually, a language implements
multiple rules.

\begin{itemize}
\itemsep1pt\parskip0pt\parsep0pt
\item
  Functions define a new scope; blocks do not (in JavaScript)
\end{itemize}

\begin{description}
\item[Global scope]
Variables that are accessible from \emph{any point} in the program make
up the global scope.
\item[Block scope]
Any logical block, often denoted by containing curly braces (\texttt{\{}
and \texttt{\}}), will create a new scope. This is the case in the C
programming language, amongst others,
\item[Function scope]
Any function definition defines a new scope. Parameters of the function
are part of this newly defined scope.
\end{description}

In JavaScript, the run-time environment defines what is in the global
scope. The JavaScript engines in web browsers usually provide access to
the \ac{dom} through the \texttt{document} object, whereas Node.js
provides the \texttt{require} function to include CommonJS-style
modules.

In contrast, the Java programming language implements block scope, but
no global scope.

\subsubsection{Common scoping problems}\label{common-scoping-problems}

The following are common phenomena that arise through scoping and may be
the cause of problems. Though being typical for JavaScript, many of
those problems can arise in other programming languages, in the same or
similar form, as well.

These phenomena can generally be helpful or hindering, and thus be
desired or undesired. The goal of the concept developed in this thesis
is to make the developer recognize those phenomena during author-time,
and thus avoid confusion and reduce errors.

\begin{description}
\item[Hoisting]
is the implicit process, as done by the JavaScript engine, of moving
variable and function declarations „from where they appear in the flow
of the code to the top of the code“ \cite{getify}. By code,
\citename{getify} refers to the scope block. Any variable declaration
inside a scope block is hoisted to the top of the scope block.

\begin{verbatim}
        function foo() {
          a = 2;
          var a;
          console.log( a );
        }
\end{verbatim}

The above code is actually processed as:

\begin{verbatim}
        function foo() {
          var a;
          a = 2;
          console.log( a );
        }
\end{verbatim}

The variable declaration of \texttt{a} is moved, or „hoisted“, to the
top of the scope block of \texttt{foo}. Hoisting can impose unexpected
behaviour, especially when declaring variables of the same name in
nested scopes.
\item[Closures]
are a common phenomenon in JavaScript programs, but are more widely used
than they are understood. Citing \citename{getify}, closure is „when a
function is able to remember and access its lexical scope even when that
function is executing outside its lexical scope.“ \citeyear{getify} As
functions are first-class objects in JavaScript, they can be passed
around like variables, for example as callbacks. A function can also
return another function. But, as JavaScript works with \emph{lexical
scope} and, according to the nesting rules presented before, a function
must always have access to its ancestor scopes, an instance of the whole
scope chain is returned or passed along with the function. In other
words, the function „closes“ or „forms a closure“ over its ancestor
scopes. This may impact performance, as the closed-over scopes have to
stay in memory as long as a reference to the closure exists. It may also
lead to unexpected behaviour, for example if a variable defined outside
of a closure is used inside of it (see \citeasnoun*[Ch. 5]{getify} for
more examples).
\item[Shadowing]
is a consequence of nested scopes. If a variable (1) is defined in a
containing scope, and a new variable (2) of the same name is defined in
a contained scope, the contained scope has no access to (1). In other
words, variable (1) is \emph{shadowed} by variable (2). As with all of
the phenomenons listed here, this can either be desired or unwanted
behaviour. In the code example below, shadowing the variable \texttt{i}
would have prevented an infinite loop. A good solution to avoid
shadowing is choosing different variable names throughout nested scopes.
\item[Implicit variable declaration]
JavaScript allows for the creation of variables and object properties in
an implicit way (\emph{silently}). Instead of declaring it a variable
using a \texttt{var} statement, they can as well just be used without
prior declaration, for example:

\begin{verbatim}
i = 3;
\end{verbatim}

Those variables are implicitly declared in the \emph{global scope}. As
this is usually unwanted behaviour, it is considered good practice to
always declare variables explicilty. However, this problem is taken care
off already by linters (see \fullref{solutions-to-similar-problems}).
\item[Lookup performance]
The variable lookup through scope chains, as described above in
\fullref{nested-scope-variable-lookup}, can have an impact on the
performance of an application. Each time a variable is encountered, the
JavaScript engine performs the lookup process, navigating from the
bottom of tjhe scope chain upwards until it is found. If a variable,
which is defined in an ancestor scope (the global scope, for example),
is accessed within a deeply nested scope, the lookup process slows down
the execution of the program, as shown by \citeasnoun{castorina}. He
furthermore suggests to cache the variable in a closer scope, if
possible.
\end{description}
